Of course, we need to be able to send new messages and therefore I'll add a new widget in the chat
folder, a new message to start.
Now, this can also be a state less widget, but it should be a stateful widget because I actually want
to be able to validate the user input and disable the send button if nothing was entered.
So here all named is new message and then, of course, import material, Dodge Dart from the flutter
package.
And what should we return here?
Well, we can return a container actually should work fine with a little bit of margin, which I only
want to have on the top, though.
So we'll add some top margin here on this container so that there is some spacing between our TextField
and the master list.
And I'll also add some padding with Etch INSETs, all of eight as well, so that we also have some space
inside of this text input box widget.
And then the child here is a role because I actually want to have two items next to each other, the
actual text input field and the button to send the message.
So here we need two children and the first child is a TextField now here a regular TextField, because
I'm not wrapping this in a forum, I'll just validated on the go, so to say, without a big forum,
because we don't need this here for this very basic input field.
Now, you would get an error like this, you actually need to wrap this into expand that as well.
Otherwise, a TextField in a row will cause an error because it tries to take up too much space with
expanded around it.
This will work, however, now on the TextField, all at a declaration input declaration where I set
a label of.
Send.
Message.
To make it clear what this TextField does, in case it wasn't clear and I want to listen on every keystroke
with the on changed event here, with the unchanged function where we get the user input and where we
then can do something, for example, validated and unlocked a button to send it, which is the item
I'll add next to the expanded widget here, icon button.
And this would be to send Icon.
So here I'll add a color or theme of context.
Primary color.
And I'll add, Aykan, which should be the send I can hear.
Now, of course, this button also needs a unpressed handler so that something happens or can happen
when we click it.
The button should also only be enabled if a message was entered there for a new message state, we can
manage that state, we can have a variable entered message, which initially is an empty string.
And here in unchanged, we call set state and set entered message equal to the value we got here.
Now this will run on every keystroke.
So we update the stored entered message with every keystroke and now we can use entered message to lock
or unlock the icon button by only conditionally adding dysfunction.
So on the icon button on Prestia, we can check if entered message trimmed is empty.
If it is empty, we know we have no valid message even after removing all X's whitespace with trim.
And if that's the case, all set on pressed to null, which means it has no function attached and this
will automatically disable the button.
That's how Flutter works.
If the message is not empty, I will set dysfunction here as a value for unpressed.
So now there is a function to execute when the buttons pressed and therefore the button will be enabled.
Now, right now, we're not sending any message, but this should work already.
So let's go to the chat screen and there we have a column with our messages now below the messages here.
We can therefore now simply add our new message widget and of course, you need to import a new message,
start from the respective POV here.
So for safety's, we have this message here at the bottom and it is annoying floating action button,
we can entirely delete this.
We don't need the floating action button anymore, so let's get rid of it.
Like that, and now here, here's the message, but it's disabled, but if I enter a valid message,
it's enabled and I can press it.
But of course, nothing happens right now.
So we need to change this.
We need to make sure that when we press this, we may be also unfocussed, this field, so that the
keyboard goes away automatically, but then also that this message is being sent.
Now, let's start with unfocussed here, dysfunction should be triggered and I don't want to write everything
here in this anonymous function, so instead I'd rather add a function up here.
Send a message.
And in there, I'll, first of all, use focus, scope of context and call unfocussed to close the keyboard,
which might be open, and it's sent a message which they offer is connected here like this without parentheses,
just pointing at it.
And instead of send a message, we now want to use fire store to create this new message.
So for this, we import package cloud forest or a cloud fire store, Dodge Dart.
And then here we can use fires, for instance, and target that Chet collection.
And here we now want to add a new document, which we do with the ADD method.
Now, this takes a map which describes the new document, and we want to have a TextField here because
every chat message should have a TextField.
Our Dommy message has one two.
So here, text and the values should, of course, be the entered message.
So what's stored in this variable?
And that should be all we need to do to send a new message.
Now, this gives us a future and we could wait for it to complete.
We could show a loading spinner.
But I think in a chat application, we don't really need this.
So that should really be all we need.
And please note that we also don't need to add any authentication token or anything like that.
This is all managed behind the scenes by Firebase here.
So if we simply save this, we should be able to send a new message.
If I enter one, does this work and I click send you see, here's my message now, of course, the formatting
is not final, but this is my message.
So that works now to improvements.
I think it would be nice if the message input field would be cleared thereafter.
And I also want to make sure that the messages are ordered in the opposite direction so that the most
recent message is here at the bottom and not at the top.
To make sure that this happens, to make sure that the orderings correct, we can go to message just
a dart and they're on the list view.
There is a little extra field you can set.
You can set the reverse to true.
And this will do just what the name implies.
It will order the messages or the fields differently.
It will scroll from the bottom to the top.
Now, you see hello's still is ordered below.
Does this work simply because of how the auto ID was created?
When I manually edit this document.
But if I delete this document with hello.
So if I enter hello here.
You see now this is at the bottom, so that's nice now for clearing the input here in new message.
I want to clear the message or the input whenever we send a new message.
And to do that, we can add a controller to the text field here and create a new controller in our state
here.
A final.
Controller.
New text editing controller like this.
And use this controller here and send a message.
To call control are clear and now bind this controller to the textfield simply by pointing at it here
on the controller argument.
If we now safeties and I type, does this clear.
You see, it clears and this is also closed.
Now, one thing you also see, however, is the ordering here still is not working entirely as it should.
And you see that also here in Firebase, by default, the oldest document is the topmost one and the
most recent one is the bottommost one.
And since we reverse this here, it's the opposite.
Now, one way of ordering this correctly and making sure that we have a consistent order is that we
all the store timestamp along with the text when a document is being created and we didn't order by
that time stamp.
So here on new message, we can then go to the place where we add a new document.
And besides text, we can also add a created attfield.
The name is up to you, doesn't have to be created that and you can then use timestamped up now to create
a new timestamp.
Now time stamp is a class that is available made available by the cloud firestorm package.
Now, with this, we create the time stamp, which will be part of the document that's being stored
and it's stored in a created ATTFIELD.
So now when we retrieve the messages here before we actually set up that listener or that stream, before
we get access to that stream on the collection, we can actually call order by.
And this allows us to order the documents we're about to fetch by a certain field and we can order by
created at so by that new field I just added.
Now, of course, my existing methods just don't have that field.
So I will quickly delete all those messages.
If you have a lot of messages, you can also delete the entire chat collection.
Instead, it will be recreated automatically as soon as you start adding messages again.
But once it's empty, all safeties go back and send a new message.
Hello?
Does this work?
And you see, it's still ordered correctly, but simply because we have to specify how we want to order
this and by default, it's ordered an ascending way, I want to order in a descending way, though,
so I'll set descending to true here.
That's the second argument you can pass to order by.
And if you set descending to Drew, you see now that this work is the second message here.
So this message, which I submitted a little bit later than the first one.
And if I add another new message and no new message, you will see that now this is the bottommost message.
And even if I restart the disappear here, if I completely reloaded, you see this order is kept.
So now we finally have the correct order here, which is, of course, super important and which is
what we ultimately want here.
With that out of the way, let's work on those chat messages.
They look a bit ugly like this.
And of course, we also want to make sure that we can quickly tell whoever this message is by us or
by another user.